RFC: Roadmap for Shapely 2.0 (#1)
shapely/shapely-rfc: rfc/0001-shapely-2.0-roadmap.md

RFC 1: Roadmap for Shapely 2.0
==============================

* Request for comments: 1

> * Author:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Author: Joris Van den Bossche
```

* Date: 2020-04-22

## Abstract

This proposal summarizes changes for a new major version of Shapely: a refactoring
of the internals (switching from ctypes to wrapping GEOS objects in a Python
extension type written in C), providing performant vectorized operations
combined with a small clean-up of the API.

## Introduction

Shapely provides a user-friendly interface for the manipulation and analysis of
geometric objects, based on the GEOS C++ library. Shapely is widely used and has
become the de-facto standard for working with "Simple Feature" geometries in
Python.

Currently, Shapely only provides an interface for scalar geometry objects. When
organizing many Shapely geometries in arrays, there is missing functionality for

> vectorized functions (i.e. users have to manually loop over the array to call

Reviewer: ```suggestion
vectorized functions (i.e. users have to loop over the array in Python to call
```

the scalar functions/properties) and this also has a large overhead limiting the
performance of such applications.

Further, Shapely currently wraps the GEOS library using `ctypes`. While being

> a low-barrier way to wrap a C library, this runtime linking also gives overhead

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a low-barrier way to wrap a C library, this runtime linking also entails overhead
```

arrays (numpy ufuncs), and can provide considerable performance benefits
(https://caspervdw.github.io/Introducing-Pygeos/).

However, creating a separate project with its own Geometry class that is not
fully compatible with the widely used Shapely package fragments the user
experience. For having a clear story for the community around geometry
operations in Python and to avoid a split in the community, this RFC proposes to
integrate the improvements developed in PyGEOS into Shapely. See also
[#782](https://github.com/Toblerity/Shapely/issues/782/) for some discussion on
this.

More specifically, this RFC proposes to:

* Refactor the internals to remove the usage of `ctypes`, and instead wrap the
  GEOS geometry objects in a Python extension type.
* Provide functionality to work with arrays of geometry objects with a familiar
  NumPy array interface, i.e. optimized, vectorized ufuncs for all GEOS
  operations. This adds a required dependency on numpy.
* Use the vectorized operations for the implementation of the scalar operations,
  preserving the existing Shapely scalar API.
* Make some API changes that are partly required and also desirable (e.g.

>   regarding mutability of geometries, ctypes interface, etc).

Reviewer: Yes :+1: :+1: :+1: :+1:

>>> np.array([mp], dtype=object)
...
TypeError: object of type 'Point' has no len()

# MultiPolygon gets splitted
>>> from shapely.geometry import MultiPolygon, box
>>> mpoly = MultiPolygon([box(0, 0, 1, 1), box(2, 2, 3, 3)])
>>> np.array([mpoly], dtype=object)
array([[<shapely.geometry.polygon.Polygon object at 0x7f9846379ac0>,
        <shapely.geometry.polygon.Polygon object at 0x7f9846379670>]],
      dtype=object)
```

When working with arrays of geometry objects, the "iterability" of the
geometries becomes an annoyance.

The "Multi" geometry types also have a `.geoms` attribute, which gives access to
a list of geometries to iterate over. So the question here can be: isn't this
sufficient? Accessing this specific attribute doesn't seem problematic, as you
need to know anyway that you have a "Multi" geometry, as the others will raise an
error on iter/getitem.

**Proposal for Shapely 2.0** Deprecate and eventually remove the iterability of
"Multi" geometries, and point users to the `.geoms` attribute.

This means that code like `mpoly[0]` or `for geom in mpoly: ...` needs to be
replaced with `mpoly.geoms[0]` or `for geom in mpoly.geoms: ...`.

### Empty geometries

TO FILL IN

> inconsistencies in emtpy geometries, cfr https://github.com/Toblerity/Shapely/issues/742

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Shapely 1.x is inconsistent in treating empty geometries, cfr https://github.com/Toblerity/Shapely/issues/742.
```

### Spatial indexing with STRTree

TO FILL IN

PyGEOS also implements an STRtree. However, the API is not compatible with the
one that is now in Shapely (but more similar to the API of `rtree`): the tree in
PyGEOS returns integer indices, while the tree of Shapely returns actual
geometry objects (cfr https://github.com/Toblerity/Shapely/issues/615).

The behaviour of Shapely can easily be implemented on top of the behaviour of
PyGEOS (to avoid a duplicate tree implementation). But the question here will
still be how we want to provide this in the public API. Can we somehow unify
this? Or just provide two tree objects users can choose from? Or is it
acceptable to deprecate the current shapely behaviour? (or provide a keyword to
still return geometries instead of integers?)

> 

Reviewer: How about for 2.0 we replace strtree.STRTree with a class that stores only integer indexes of the items in the sequence we initialize from. Shapely's object-storing tree was an attempt to make it very user friendly, but in the end it's not useful for geopandas, which already has its own object storage.

```python
"""strtree.py"""

class STRTree:
    """Create an STR-packed R-tree from a sequence of geoms"""
    def intersection(geom):
        """Return indexes of tree leaves that intersect with geom"""
    def nearest(geom):
        """Return the index of the tree leaf nearest geom"""
```

Reviewer 2: It's pretty easy to just `iloc` in GeoPandas

### Prepared Geometries

TO FILL IN

In Shapely, there is a `PreparedGeometry` (and `prep` function), which needs to
be used explicitly by the user. In PyGEOS, we are however thinking to "just" use
this when appropriate under the hood, without the user needing to think about
this. For example the STRtree already uses this (when a predicate is specified),
and in https://github.com/pygeos/pygeos/pull/92 I am looking at enabling this in
the vectorized spatial predicates like `contains` etc. The question here is if
we will always know when this is "appropriate", or if there are cases that it
can unexpectedly give a large overhead for situations prepared geoms were used
unnecessarily (feedback on this in the linked PR is very welcome!). But if we do
it under the hood, this could also mean that `PreparedGeometry` could be

> deprecated.

Reviewer: My sense is that preparing all geometries by default in an effort to be user friendly goes too far (like the project did with the object-storing strtree). If you don't need it, you don't need it, and users and applications that do need it can just call an API function to prepare the geometry.

### The array interface and ctypes attribute

> TO FILL IN

Reviewer: @jorisvandenbossche we should remove the ctypes attribute in 2.0. The array interface to a geometry's coordinate sequence (the vertices that parametrize the object) could still be useful.

error on iter/getitem.

**Proposal for Shapely 2.0** Deprecate and eventually remove the iterability of
"Multi" geometries, and point users to the `.geoms` attribute.

This means that code like `mpoly[0]` or `for geom in mpoly: ...` needs to be
replaced with `mpoly.geoms[0]` or `for geom in mpoly.geoms: ...`.

### Empty geometries

There are multiple ways that you can end up with empty geometries:

- Manually constructing one (e.g. with ``Polygon()`` or from a mapping
  representing an empty geometry)
- Importing from WKT / WKB representation
- As a result from a spatial operation (e.g. empty intersection)

Shapely 1.x is inconsistent in creating empty geometries between those different
ways. A small example for an empty Polygon geometry:

```python
# Method 1: using an empty constructor
>>> g1 = shapely.geometry.Polygon()
>>> type(g1)
<class 'shapely.geometry.polygon.Polygon'>
>>> g1.geom_type
GeometryCollection
>>> g1.wkt
GEOMETRYCOLLECTION EMPTY

# Method 2: converting from WKT
>>> g2 = shapely.wkt.loads("POLYGON EMPTY")
>>> type(g2)
<class 'shapely.geometry.polygon.Polygon'>
>>> g2.geom_type
Polygon
>>> g2.wkt
POLYGON EMPTY

> # Method 2: result of a spatial operation

Reviewer 3: "Method 3"

This way, the GEOS pointer is accessible from C without Python overhead as a
static attribute of the Python object (an attribute of the C struct that makes
up a Python object).

Hence, a single `Geometry` Python extension type is defined in C wrapping a
`GEOSGeometry` pointer. In addition, this extension type can further be
subclassed in Python to provide the geometry type-specific classes (Point,
LineString, Polygon, etc).

In [pygeos/pygeos#104](https://github.com/pygeos/pygeos/pull/104), we
experimented with this Python subclassing approach (a registry of subclasses is
constructed such that the C functions creating new geometries can return the
correct Python subclasses from C). The conclusion here is that this approach
only adds minimal overhead to the C functions. This
[branch](https://github.com/Toblerity/Shapely/compare/master...jorisvandenbossche:geometry-subclasses?expand=1)
starts to refactor the existing Shapely geometry classes as subclasses of the
C extension type.

Compared to the current `ctypes` based approach, this has some benefits:

* `ctypes` is not (or no longer) the recommended way to wrap a complex C/C++

>   library. It adds overhead and possible runtime issues.

Reviewer 4: Comment from the peanut gallery: do you have some references on this? I assume that the current consensus is to either do a Python extension type or to use CFFI, but it would be great to have some reading material on the topic.

Author: @astrojuanlu sorry for the *very*late reply. I don't have a direct reference at hand that explains this (more based on general experience and from talking to other people), but we certainly had several reports with installation issues related to this.

  typically meant to share memory. However, this is not the case here: the
  actual coordinate values of the geometries are copied into the new array, and
  are not "viewed".
- In a similar way as having "iterable" geometries (see the previous section),
  having scalar geometries with an array interface gives difficulties when
  operating with numpy arrays of geometries and numpy ufuncs.
- The `coords` attribute already provides a more explicit way to access the
  coordinates, potentially as a numpy array.

Finally, the current array interface in Shapely provided a way to have access to
the coordinates as a numpy array without depending on numpy. This restriction is
not longer present, and we can directly return numpy arrays of coordinates where
needed.

**Proposal for Shapely 2.0** Deprecate (in 1.8) and remove the `ctypes`
attribute, the `array_interface()` method, and the `__array_interface__`
conversion to numpy arrays for the relevant geometries.

Access to the coordinates of a geometry as a numpy array is still available
through the `coords` attribute (`np.array(line.coords)` will still give the same

> array as `np.array(line)` does now).

Reviewer: :+1:
